# Appliance-Energy-Prediction
The objective of Appliance Energy Prediction of a household is to predict the amount of energy that will be consumed by that household in the future, considering the existing natural conditions of its locality such as temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure and many others, within a given interval of time. The dataset consists of information about such physical conditions from both inside and outside the house and corresponding Appliance energy consumptions which are recorded at every 10 minutes for 4.5 months.

All the features in the dataset are numerical in nature and there were no missing or null values. But feature ‘lights’ and one of random variables in ‘rv1’ and ‘rv2’ are dropped as ‘lights’ had 75 percentile of its data are 0 and ‘rv1’ and ‘rv2’ columns were not different. Feature ‘date’ is split into ‘weekday’, ‘hour’, ‘month’, and ‘day’. Histograms and Boxplots are plotted for all the features and most of them followed bell-shaped distribution but many of them were skewed and had significant number of outliers. The correlation heatmap indicated that both temperature features and humidity features were strongly and positively correlated among themselves.

Some other Exploratory Analyses are performed, and respective graphs are plotted. MinMaxScaler() is used to scale the data after the outliers were removed. Data is split into Training and Testing sets and then a set of Regression models are trained on the training set. Each model is evaluated using evaluation metrics, Mean Squared Error, Root Mean Squared Error and R-squared score and the top 3 models are selected for Hyper-parametric Tuning. 

Tuning of Hyper-parameters is done on Random Forest, Extra-Trees Regressor and XGBoost. Even though the Hyper-tuned Random Forest had a slightly greater score on the test data than the Hyper-tuned Extra-Trees Regressor, the latter provided the best generalization from training data to test data than the former.
Stacking is performed on the top 3 hyper-tuned models, and we see that its performance is close to, but is not better than that of the Hyper-tuned Extra-Trees Regressor. Feature selection is done, and 10 features are selected to fit into these set of Regression models, but the performance was not as good as the Hyper-tuned Extra-Trees Regressor. 

Hence, we conclude that Hyper-Tuned Extra-Trees Regressor with R2-scores 0.928 on the training set and 0.712 on the test set is the best model for prediction of Appliance energy consumption for the given dataset.
